[Excel] (Custom functions) Debugging article (#773)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/excel/custom-functions-debugging.md

---
ms.date: 02/26/2019
description: Debug your custom functions in Excel.
title: Custom functions debugging (preview)
localization_priority: Normal
---

> # Custom functions debugging (preview)

Reviewer: i think we can structure the article a bit different.  I will clearly separate the platform where the debugging starts. 

1. Debugging in Excel for Windows.  then clearly separate you have 2 options here: directly in VS Code and using the Browser dev tools [this last will be a link because is also used for Mac].
2. Debuggingin  Excel Online :  using VSCode and Edge.
3. debuggin in Excel for  Mac -> provide a link to the debugging in browser
4. Debugging if not using VSCode via command lines.

Debugging for custom functions can be accomplished by multiple means, depending on what platform you're using. Methods differ between [Office Online for Windows](#windows-10-visual-studio-and-microsoft-edge), [Office Online for Mac](#mac-and-chrome-debugger), [Office Desktop for Windows](#for-windows-and-visual-studio), and [Office Desktop for Mac](#for-mac). You can also issue debugging commands through [the command line directly](#using-the-command-line).

[!include[Excel custom functions note](../includes/excel-custom-functions-note.md)]

> [!NOTE]
> For simplicity, this article shows debugging in the context of using Visual Studio Code to edit, run tasks, and in some cases use the debug view. If you are using a different editor or command line tool, see the [command line instructions](#Use-the-command-line-tools-to-debug) at the end of this article.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Before debugging, ensure that you have trusted self-signed certificates for your project. For instructions, see [Adding self-signed certificates as trusted root certificates](https://github.com/OfficeDev/generator-office/blob/master/src/docs/ssl.md). 
```

> 

Reviewer: as a pre-condition of this article, we need a project already created, i am assuming with yo office? lets add that assumption: "if you dont have a vs code project create one here" probably is a link to the tutorial.

> 

Reviewer: i would like to add a section on how can i debug custom functions implemented as azure functions? if i own both how can i step into the code of the azure function?

Reviewer 2: Not that I know of.

> ## Use the browser developer tools to debug Excel Online

Reviewer: this title is a bit confusing to me. I am not debugging Excel Online, I am debugging custom functions using my browser. should not be "Debugging Custom Functions using Browser"?  or something along those lines?

2. Choose **Terminal > Run Task** and type or select **Watch**. This will monitor and rebuild for any file changes.
3. Choose **Terminal > Run Task** and type or select **Dev Server**. 

### Sideload your add-in   

1. Open [Microsoft Office Online](https://office.live.com/).
2. Open a new Excel workbook.
3. Open the  **Insert** tab on the ribbon and, in the **Add-ins** section, choose **Office Add-ins**.
4. On the  **Office Add-ins** dialog, select the **MY ADD-INS** tab, choose **Manage My Add-ins**, and then  **Upload My Add-in**.
    
    ![The Office Add-ins dialog with a drop-down in the upper right reading "Manage my add-ins" and a drop-down below it with the option "Upload My Add-in"](../images/office-add-ins-my-account.png)

5.  **Browse** to the add-in manifest file, and then select **Upload**.
    
    ![The upload add-in dialog with buttons for browse, upload, and cancel.](../images/upload-add-in.png)

> [!NOTE]
> Once you've sideloaded to the document, it will remain sideloaded each time you open the document.

### Start debugging

1. Open developer tools in the browser. For Chrome and most browsers F12 will open the developer tools.

> 2. In developer tools, open your source code script file (functions.js or functions.ts).

Author: ```suggestion
2. In developer tools, open your source code script file using **Cmd+P** or **Ctrl+P** (functions.js or functions.ts).
```

3. [Set a breakpoint](https://code.visualstudio.com/Docs/editor/debugging#_breakpoints) in the custom function source code. 

> If you need to change the code you can make edits in Visual Studio Code and save the changes. Refresh the browser to see the changes loaded.

Author: ```suggestion
If you need to change the code you can make edits in VS Code and save the changes. Refresh the browser to see the changes loaded.
```

> ## Use the Visual Studio Code debugger for Excel Desktop

Author: ```suggestion
## Use the VS Code debugger for Excel Desktop
```

> You can use Visual Studio Code to debug custom functions in Office Excel on the desktop.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use VS Code to debug custom functions in Office Excel on the desktop.
```

3.  **Browse** to the add-in manifest file and then select **Upload**.
    
    ![The upload add-in dialog with buttons for browse, upload, and cancel.](../images/upload-add-in.png)

### Set breakpoints
1. In VS Code, open your source code script file (functions.js or functions.ts).
2. In the source code, select in the margin next to a line of code to set a breakpoint on that line.
3. In the Excel workbook, enter a formula that uses your custom function.

## Use the command line tools to debug

If you are not using VS Code, you can use the command line (such as bash, or PowerShell) to run your add-in. You'll need to use the browser developer tools to debug your code in Excel Online. You cannot debug the desktop version of Excel using the command line.

1. From the command line run `npm run watch` to watch for and rebuild when code changes occur.
2. Open a second command line window (the first one will be blocked while running the watch.)

3. If you want to start your add-in in the desktop version of Excel, run the following command
    

>     `npm run start:desktop`

Author: ```suggestion
    `npm run start desktop`
```

    
    Or if you prefer to start your add-in in Excel Online run the following command
    

>     `npm run start:web`

Author: ```suggestion
    `npm run start web`
```

---
ms.date: 03/11/2019
description: Debug your custom functions in Excel.
title: Custom functions debugging (preview)
localization_priority: Normal
---
# Custom functions debugging (preview)

> Debugging for custom functions can be accomplished by multiple means, depending on what platform you're using. Methods differ between [Office Online for Windows](#windows-10-visual-studio-and-microsoft-edge), [Office Online for Mac](#mac-and-chrome-debugger), [Office Desktop for Windows](#for-windows-and-visual-studio-code), and [Office Desktop for Mac](#for-mac). You can also issue debugging commands through [the command line directly](#using-the-command-line).

Author: ```suggestion
Debugging for custom functions can be accomplished by multiple means, depending on what platform you're using. Methods differ between platforms (such as Windows, Mac, and Online) and depending on what method you prefer (Visual Studio Code or online debugging tools). You can also issue debugging commands through [the command line directly](#commands-for-building-and-running-your-add-in).
```

### Start debugging

1. Open developer tools in the browser. For Chrome and most browsers F12 will open the developer tools.
2. In developer tools, open your source code script file using **Cmd+P** or **Ctrl+P** (functions.js or functions.ts).
3. [Set a breakpoint](https://code.visualstudio.com/Docs/editor/debugging#_breakpoints) in the custom function source code. 

If you need to change the code you can make edits in VS Code and save the changes. Refresh the browser to see the changes loaded.

## Use the VS Code debugger for Excel Desktop

You can use VS Code to debug custom functions in Office Excel on the desktop.

> [!NOTE]
> At this time, desktop debugging for the Mac is not available. Instead, refer to instructions for [using the browser tools to debug Excel Online](#debug-in-excel-online-by-using-the-browser-developer-tools).

### Run your add-in from VS Code

1. Open your custom functions root project folder in [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
2. Choose **Terminal > Run Task** and type or select **Watch**. This will monitor and rebuild for any file changes.
3. Choose **Terminal > Run Task** and type or select **Dev Server**. 

### Start the VS Code debugger

> 4. Choose **View -> Debug** or enter **Ctrl+Shift+D** to switch to debug view.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Choose **View > Debug** or enter **Ctrl+Shift+D** to switch to debug view.
```

    
    `npm run start web`
    
    For Excel Online you also need to sideload your add-in. Follow the steps in [Sideload your add-in](#Sideload-your-add-in) to sideload your add-in. Then continue to the next section to start debugging.
    
4. Open developer tools in the browser. For Chrome and most browsers F12 will open the developer tools.
5. In developer tools, open your source code script file (functions.js or functions.ts). Your custom functions code may be located near the end of the file.
6. In the custom function source code, apply a breakpoint by selecting a line of code.

If you need to change the code you can make edits in Visual Studio and save the changes. Refresh the browser to see the changes loaded.

### Commands for building and running your add-in

There are several build tasks available:
- `npm run watch`: builds for development and automatically rebuilds when a source file is saved
- `npm run build-dev`: builds for development once
- `npm run build`: builds for production
- `npm run dev-server`: runs the web server used for development

You can use the following tasks to start debugging on desktop or online.

> - `npm run start:desktop`: Starts Excel on desktop and sideloads your add-in.

Author: ```suggestion
- `npm run start desktop`: Starts Excel on desktop and sideloads your add-in.
```

> - `npm run start:web`: Starts Excel Online and sideloads your add-in.

Author: ```suggestion
- `npm run start web`: Starts Excel Online and sideloads your add-in.
```

---
ms.date: 02/21/2019
description: Debug your custom functions in Excel.
title: Custom functions debugging (preview)
localization_priority: Normal
---
# Custom functions debugging (preview)

> Debugging for custom functions can be accomplished by multiple means, depending on what platform you are using. Methods differ between [Office Online for Windows](#windows-10-and-edge), [Office Online for Mac](#mac-and-chrone), Office Desktop for Windows, and Office Desktop for Mac. You can also issue debugging commands through [the command line directly](#using-the-command-line).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Debugging for custom functions can be accomplished many ways, depending on what platform you're using. Methods differ between [Office Online for Windows](#windows-10-and-microsoft-edge), [Office Online for Mac](#mac-and-chrome), Office Desktop for Windows, and Office Desktop for Mac. You can also issue debugging commands through [the command line directly](#using-the-command-line).
```

[!include[Excel custom functions note](../includes/excel-custom-functions-note.md)]

> ## Office Online

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Debugging custom functions in Office Online
```

> ### Windows 10 and Edge

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Windows 10 and Microsoft Edge
```

Reviewer 3: It should always be Microsoft Edge with a non-breaking space.

> 1. Open your custom functions root project folder in VS Code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Open your custom functions root project folder in Visual Studio Code (VS Code).
```

Reviewer 2: [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com)

2. You may be prompted to install recommended extensions if you have based this project off of the latest yo office generator project. You should select install all, which will install [Debugger for Edge](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-edge) and [Debugger for Chrome](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-chrome) extensions for VS Code. If you are not prompted to install these, install these extensions to VS Code manually.

> 3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select Dev Server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select **Dev Server**.
```

> 4. Switch to Debug View selecting **View | Debug** or by entering **Ctrl+Shift+D**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Select **View | Debug** or enter **Ctrl+Shift+D** to switch to Debug View.
```

> 5. From the Debug options, choose Office Online (Edge).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. From the Debug options, choose Office Online (Microsoft Edge).
```

Reviewer 2: @lindalu-MSFT This is in the template and was shortened so it fits in the drop-down. Do I need make this "Microsoft Edge" and "Google Chrome" or can use the shortened form? The docs should match the template. 

Also, should the name be in quotes?  ...choose "Office Online (Edge)"

> 6. Open Excel Online using Edge and create a new workbook.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Using a Microsoft Edge browser, open Excel Online and create a new workbook.
```

Reviewer 2: "Using **the** Microsoft Edge browser"...?

7. Copy the URL for this new workbook.
8. In VS Code, select **F5** to begin debugging. A prompt will appear, which asks for the URL of your document.
9. Paste in the URL for your workbook.
10. At this point, debugging is active. You can set breakpoints within VS Code.

> 11. To see your breakpoints applied, you'll go back to the Edge window with your open workbook and insert your add-in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
11. To see your breakpoints applied, go back to the Microsoft Edge window with your open workbook and insert your add-in.
```

>     - Select **Insert | Office Add-ins**. This will open a pop-up window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Select **Insert | Office Add-ins**. This opens a pop-up window.
```

    - Select **Manage My Add-ins | Upload Add-in** in the new pop-up window.

>     - Browse for the manifest file of your add-in and select Upload.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Browse for the manifest file of your add-in and select **Upload**.
```

### Mac and Chrome

1. Open your custom functions root project folder in VS Code.
2. You may be prompted to install recommended extensions if you have based this project off of the latest yo office generator project. You should select install all, which will install [Debugger for Edge](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-edge) and [Debugger for Chrome](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-chrome) extensions for VS Code. If you are not prompted to install these, install these extensions to VS Code manually.

> 3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select Dev Server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select **Dev Server**.
```

> 4. Switch to Debug View selecting **View | Debug** or by entering **Ctrl+Shift+D**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Select **View | Debug** or enter **Ctrl+Shift+D** to switch to Debug View.
```

5. From the Debug options, choose Office Online (Chrome).

> 6. Open Excel Online using Chrome and create a new workbook.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Using a Chrome browser, open Excel Online, and create a new workbook.
```

7. Copy the URL for this new workbook.
8. In VS Code, select **F5** to begin debugging. A prompt will appear, which asks for the URL of your document.
9. Paste in the URL for your workbook.
10. At this point, debugging is active. You can set breakpoints within VS Code.

> 11. To see your breakpoints applied, you'll go back to the Chrome window with your open workbook and insert your add-in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
11. To see your breakpoints applied, go back to the Chrome window with your open workbook and insert your add-in.
```

>     - Select **Insert | Office Add-ins**. This will open a pop-up window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Select **Insert | Office Add-ins**. This opens a pop-up window.
```

    - Select **Manage My Add-ins | Upload Add-in** in the new pop-up window.

>     - Browse for the manifest file of your add-in and select Upload.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Browse for the manifest file of your add-in and select **Upload**.
```

## Office Desktop

### For Windows Or Mac

1. Open your custom functions root project folder in VS Code.

> 3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select Dev Server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Select **Terminal | Run Task** and type or select **Dev Server**.
```

> 4. Switch to Debug View selecting **View | Debug** or by entering **Ctrl+Shift+D**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Select **View | Debug** or enter **Ctrl+Shift+D**, to switch to Debug View.
```

5. From the Debug options, choose Office Desktop.
6. Select **F5** to begin debugging. A new Excel workbook will pop up, with your add-in already sideloaded and ready to use.
7. To debug, set breakpoints within VS Code.

## Using the command line

> To debug using the command line, follow the same step sequences for platform and product, but replace VS Code terminal and debugging commands with statements below, depending on your needs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To debug using the command line, follow the same step sequences for platform and product, but replace VS Code terminal and debugging commands with the following statements, depending on your needs:
```

### Watch and build your project

> - `npm run watch`: builds for development and automatically rebuilds when a source file is saved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `npm run watch`: builds for development and automatically rebuilds when a source file is saved
```

Reviewer 3: Per MSTP, for word phrases in lists, we don't use periods at the end.

Author: Oh! Ok I had that one backwards in my head for some reason. Thanks!

> - `npm run build-dev`: builds for development once.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `npm run build-dev`: builds for development once
```

> - `npm run build`: builds for production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `npm run build`: builds for production
```

### Start the dev-server

> - `npm run dev-server`: runs the web server used for development.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `npm run dev-server`: runs the web server used for development
```

1. Open your custom functions root project folder in VS Code.

> 2. You may be prompted to install recommended extensions if you've based this project off of the latest yo office generator project. Select **install all**, which will install [Debugger for Microsoft Edge](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-edge) and [Debugger for Chrome](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=msjsdiag.debugger-for-chrome) extensions for VS Code. If you're not prompted to install these, install these extensions to VS Code manually.

Reviewer 2: No need to mention whether it was created from Yo Office. I think this could be rephrased. "When the project is opened, a notification will appear if the recommended extensions are not installed. Click "Install All" to install them." I am not sure that we need to documented the specific ones here (in case they change in the future).

### For Windows Or Mac

> 1. Open your custom functions root project folder in VS Code.

Reviewer 2: @mscharlock You should put this line back. For custom functions, you need to run both Watch and Dev Server tasks.  

For a TaskPane WebView only, you don't need to run the Watch task.

Author: Gotcha, ok!
